---
weight: 11
title: Peter Kerr - Faith
authors: null
categories: null
tags: null
series: null
description: 
draft: false
date: "2026-06-28"
lastmod: "2026-06-28"
toc: true
---

<!--more-->



if you'd like to turn in your Bibles to the book of Second Timothy in the New Testament. In this letter, the Apostle Paul gives positive and negative examples, some people who are faithful and some who were unfaithful. See, it's possible to be saved, to know the Lord Jesus as your savior, to be assured of your sins being forgiven and of being a child of God, and yet not actually walking with the Lord and living the way the Lord intends.   

Now, two weeks ago, while I was here, we looked at what I called <b>the possibility of living a wasted life</b>, saved, but living a wasted life. This is kind of a continuation of that, not meant to discourage us, but <b>to challenge us</b> and to propel us forward to be very determined and intentional in terms of the way we live, right? Because it's possible to be a Christian and then just kind of float through life and and not really think about who we are, what we are, what the Lord is calling us to do, what the Lord wants us to do. So, we need to be intentional to <b>walk with the Lord</b>, to live in such a way as the Apostle Paul calls <b>fully pleasing to him in every good work</b>. 

We turn to second Timothy chapter 1 and verse 15. The first example that I want to focus on here He mentions two people in particular and he mentions Phygelus and Hermogenes. He said this you know all those in Asia have turned away from me among whom are Phygelus and Hermogenes. We don't know a lot about these people but we know that they were companions of the Apostle Paul. They worked with him for a time. So they were involved in preaching the gospel. They were involved in in sharing the good news of of the Lord and then something happened. Their hearts turned away. They became cold. They backslid. They became hardened. And so Paul talks about these two particular. He says there was a whole group of people who had turned away. But these ones in particular very significant. The scripture encourages us <b>to guard our heart</b>.  Paul says to Timothy elsewhere, "Take heed to yourself as well as to your doctrine." The scripture says we need to examine ourselves <b>to see whether we be in the faith</b>. I think sometimes we can get into <b>too comfortable of a position</b>. We believe in the security of the believer. We believe that once you're saved and in the hands of the Lord, nothing can pluck us from his hand that there is that wonderful security of knowing the Lord and of resting in him. Nothing can separate us from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our Lord. But that can create almost <b>a false sense of apathy in our lives</b>. I'm saved. Grace covers everything. So, hey, doesn't matter how I live. I mean, all my sins are forgiven. Jesus died for me. So, who cares? Like, I mean, you know, anything I do, any it's all forgiven. Grace, I'm not saved by works. I'm not saved by marital effort. It's all by grace. So, hey, grace covers it all. Just as long as I know I've trusted in Christ as my savior, I got my ticket to heaven. My name's written in heaven. Hey, that's it.  No, there's more to it than that. And it's not, and this is where we have to be very, very careful. 

It's not that the New Testament says, "Okay, to prove that you are a Christian, you need to do these things. It's not what it's saying, right? So, it's not saying you can kind of secure your spot in heaven as long as you do this, and this. That's not what it's saying. What it's saying ultimately is this. If you truly are saved, if you truly are in Christ, the outflow of that will be these things. So, always you can <u>bring it back again to that crucial thing</u>. <b>Am I in Christ?</b> Do I truly know the Lord as my savior? So the question is not do I go to church? The question is not you know did I grow up in a Christian home. The question is not did I go to camp? Did I go to Sunday school, youth group? The question is not am I a nice person. The question is not <b>do I believe the Bible</b>. <b>The question is do I know Christ personally as my savior? Am I in Christ? So that's the crux. That's the central issue. If I know Christ then a transformation has happened</b>. The Bible describes that in various ways. Talks about being a regeneration, a new birth. Anybody in in Christ is a new creation. So various ways that that's described. But but it's a factual thing. Anybody who is in Christ, they will experience that transformation. Having said that, the New Testament goes on to challenge those who claim to be in Christ. How are we living? How are we walking? Because we could become part of the statistic. All in Asia have turned away and I'm going to mention two people particularly Phygelus and the marginist they've turned away we don't want to be part of that statistic, we want to be part of what we're going to look at in terms of the positive examples that Paul gives here in second Timothy who <b>truly knew</b> the Lord, who <b>truly were faithful</b>, who <b>truly lived out</b> the reality then my life is being changed and transformed because I am a child of God yes I am born again Look in chapter 2. 

Chapter 2 verse 14. Remind them of these things, charging them before the Lord, not to strive about words to no profit, to the ruin of the hearers. But be diligent to present yourself approved to God a workman who does not need to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. But shun profane and idol babblings for they will increase to more ungodliness and their message will spread like cancer. Phygelus and Hermogenes are of this sort. He mentions two other people here. 

Very interesting. I was just speaking recently with a young fellow who has professed salvation but he has been so sidetracked into minutia. I think I that he has gotten sidetracked on. And a number of people recently who I've I've dealt with in marking Emmaus courses all bent out of shape of what about what the Nephilim were in the book of Genesis. And if you search it online, there's tons of stuff out there and people are studying who the Nephilim were, and what they were, and where they came from, and what exactly they were. It's like who cares what the Nephilim were? It does not if affect practical daily holy Christian living, right? It's a fine detail. We know very little about the Nephilim. They're mentioned once by name in the scripture, possibly twice kind of in an oblique way. Why spend hundreds of hours researching who and what the Nephilim were? 

There was a man a number of years ago that we met. They from southern Ontario and they would come up here on vacation. And this man was also obsessed with with obscure names in the Old Testament and he loved to chat and debate about it, and it just oh he into all this stuff and I'd listened to him a number of times. It's like I'm not even sure what you're talking about, where you're getting this stuff, but oh man he could just rhyme off all the stuff and it wasn't too many years after that, their marriage broke up. So while this man was so intent and willing to argue and debate on these fine little points of these obscure names, he was treating his wife and children badly. So that's horrible. That's nonsense. What's the point of that knowledge if it doesn't translate into daily life? And this is what the problem was here with Hermogenes and Phygelus. Striving about words to no profit, right? Arguing, debating, um profane and idle babbling, thinking ourselves so smart because we know this trivia. Right? And it can quote this obscure Bible verse, whatever. And he says it's nonsense. Instead, verse 15, he says, "What you need to do is to be a worker who does not need to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth." <b>Knowing how to handle and apply the scripture in a practical way that leads to godliness, practical godliness within your life</b>. Note verse 17. He says, "Their message will spread like cancer." Wow. What a what a vivid picture. These were <b>professing Christians</b>. These were people within the fellowship of God's people, but they were teaching things and getting wrapped up in things that were spiritually a disease and hurting them and hurting the body of Christ. Oh, we have to be so careful. The devil will use any trick he can to tie you up, chew you up, and spit you out. We have to be on guard the whole time, right? Take heed to yourself. Guard your heart. Don't get led astray on these things. Shun, avoid, run from profane and idol babblings, for they will increase to more ungodliness. They don't promote godliness. Let's look at another one. Second Timothy 4 and verse 10. You see, this is all very negative right now. Hold on. We're going to come to the positive examples in just a minute. 2 Timothy 4 and verse 10. Demas has forsaken me, having loved this present world. Again, we know from other references that Demas had worked with Paul. He'd been a companion of the Apostle Paul. It <b>seemed</b> like he was a Christian and seemed like he was going on well for the Lord for for quite some time. But in his heart, there was a problem. <b>unseen</b> to those around about. Right? He hid this. But ultimately his main concern, his love was this present world, what this world had to offer, the stuff of this world, the honor of this world, the recognition, the the accolades of this world world. He wanted everything that this world had to offer. And so he forsakes Paul. He turns away from the truth. and he runs after stuff. Paul had warned Timothy in 1 Timothy chapter 6, those who would be rich pierce themselves through with many sorrows. For the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil. And when we focus on the here and the now, we want <b>comfort</b>. We want <b>convenience</b>. We want <b>wealth</b>. We we want <b>ease</b>. We want <b>pleasure</b>. We want <b>everything</b> that this world has to offer. We can <b>sabotage</b> our Christian life. We can sink our Christian life. We can make ourselves unprofitable in terms of a Christian testimony. We can make ourselves unprofitable in terms of effectiveness serving the Lord. Right? And we can become unprofitable in our own walk for the Lord because worldliness and the desire for worldly things will stumble us. They'll trip us up so that instead of being able to to walk with the Lord in an unimpeded fashion, we're tripping over our own desires. Right? So, Demas serves as an example that we need to avoid and presents a challenge to us, doesn't it? Where is our love? [14:16] Ultimately, what you love the most is your God. If you really love something, that becomes an idol if it's not the true and living God, right? Because then it's a false god. And whatever we love the most, we will give out time and attention and money and passion too, right? And so if it's this world, if it's the things and people and stuff of this world, we're going to worship a false god. 

And so it's a challenge. <b>Where is my heart?</b> Is it here now, temporary, temporal stuff? Or do I love the Lord my God with all my heart, soul, mind, spirit? Where is my love? One more here. 2 Timothy 4 and verse 14. Alexander the copper smith did me much harm. May the Lord repay him according to his works. You also must beware of him for he has greatly resisted our words. Quite an extreme example of somebody who obviously was a real thorn in the side to to the Apostle Paul and who worked to contradict him and counteract him in every way possible. 

when act in Acts 20 where the apostle Paul had called the elders from Ephesus to come and meet him in Miletus one of the things that he warns that group of of shepherds of the local church he said there's two attacks he said there's savage wolves that are going to come from outside [15:49], going to attack the the church, going to attack the Christians and then he said from inside men are going to arise and they will bring strange teachings and they will lead part of the walk astray. So he says you got to be aware that there's two fronts of attacks here. One is internal, the one is external. It seems that that Alexander the coppersmith with was maybe this external attack whereas some of these others that we've mentioned Demas and I and Phygelus were actually internal. They were part of <b>the professing body of of Christ</b> [16:31]. Notice that Paul is not unrealistic. He doesn't just say, "Ah, don't worry about it. God will protect you." He said, "No, you so beware of him. You beware of him. He did me a lot of harm. Paul says when somebody decides to oppose the gospel and oppose Christ and oppose the truth, they can do us a lot of harm. Yes, the Lord does ultimately protect us. But our reputation can be ruined by false accusations. You think of the Lord Jesus, how he was falsely accused, tried and executed for crimes he never committed. Right? Those from the outside can do us great harm. And we have to be wise as serpents and as harmless as doves. And and as we engage with the world and an increasingly hostile world, even in our so-called safe Canada, okay, more and more, we're going to face <b>hostile</b> attacks and we need to be careful how we respond to people, what we say and don't say, <b>not in a cowardly way</b>, but in a way of prudence and wisdom to know how do we present ourselves. 

One of the things that I was just discussing back and forth with our Emmaus board and we have some emails back and forth [17:32] is the whole thing of of even insurance and protection for our EMA situation there as to what is involved as we go forward with some of these new bills that have been passed at government level and even the content of our EMA courses theoretically now could <b>be labeled as hate crime</b>, right? Hate speech. How do we go forward from here? How do we handle that? We need so much wisdom and and and sensitivity to know how to do that. 


If you go to a closed country, say a Muslim country, you can't just stand on the corner with a loudspeaker and a big banner and selling Bibles or whatever. You can't do that, right? But does the gospel still go forth? Yes, it does. Right? They find other ways and means of doing that, right? And so, you have to be very, very wise. I I had an amazing phone call this week, a man out in Winnipeg.   The church that he works in is all intercultural, multicultural, made up mainly of refugees, people from all over the world, and he has connections all over the world. And so he was asking for some input and advice in terms of accessing our online courses through the app. There's a group of believers, Christians from Afghanistan who have fled me. They managed to get across the border into Pakistan and They're hiding illegally in Pakistan. One of the difficulties that they face is that in Pakistan, if you find an Afghani who is there illegally and you turn them into authorities, you get $100 US, which is a lot of money for them. So there's a high incentive for people to turn these people in. So these Afghanis are living in complete secrecy. They never ever leave their place during the day. They gather one once a week on I think it's a Tuesday evening undercover of night at a particular apartment. They they go at different times, one at a time. They leave one at a time. They can they cannot sing out aloud. Okay? They that privilege is not there. They they live in extreme danger. They can't just go to the store to buy groceries. They're dependent on local believers who will smuggle in food for them. We don't know how many there are in this group, but they're trying to get across the border from Pakistan into India. They could get to India, they can get out as refugees to Canada or or to the states. But to make their way all the way across Pakistan is very very very dangerous and difficult. As I chatted with this this man, there was at first I was just speaking to the Canadian and then another voice came on the line and he is an Afghani who been this route. He he escaped under threat of his life to Pakistan and he managed to make it out. India and now he's in Canada and he's liazing with these people. He does Bible studies by Zoom with them. One of the questions they asked, they said if they did the Emmas courses on the app and if their phone was confiscated, can the authorities easily open that app to see that they've been studying Bible courses? Because if they did, they could be executed. And so they the security is a big issue for them. And just listening to this man the conditions that these believers are are living under. I said, "Wow, we still have it very very good here even though things are changing and who knows where it could go in the next few years." But as I heard about these believers who continue to meet and who continue to secretly try and spread the gospel and witness, you know, my heart was just moved thinking about these people. They are experiencing this savage attack. of of the wolves from outside all the time. But they also have to continually be worried about plants, people who smuggled in to be part of that group that the government puts to try and find these groups so that they can then betray the group. So an amazing amazing situation. And so when you think of what Paul is saying to Timothy in his day and time when yes many Christians were were getting arrested and killed as well. And in fact Paul himself was was martyed for for his faith.   not long after this book of second Timothy is written, second Timothy is the last of Paul's epistles. And in chapter 4, he indicates that he's at the end of his life and his life is ready to be poured out. And so his warning to Timothy is is very personal and very strong. Be on guard. Watch yourself. There's there's real trouble. Don't don't distance this lightly. You could be the next target here. So, make sure you are guarding your heart, walking with the Lord, intentional to make sure that you're being faithful to to the Lord. In second Timothy   chapter   1 and verse 18, 2 Timothy 1 and verse 18, just go back to the previous book just for a cross reference there. So, 1 Timothy chapter 1 and verse 18 This charge I commit to you, son Timothy, according to the prophecies previously made concerning you, that by them you may wage the good warfare, having faith and a good conscience, which some, having rejected, concerning the faith, have suffered shipwreck, of whom are Hermogenes and Alexander, whom I delivered to Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme. So two of those names that we saw in second Timothy are mentioned. there as well. And again, just that caution, right? They made shipwreck of their faith. They seemed to be a boat sailing nicely, the Christians, you know, doing stuff, talking about the Lord, reading their Bible, and then they made shipwreck. They weren't watching and they ran ground. They they hit a reef. And and and you and I never know what traps there are laid for us, right? We have to be so careful. The traps of Satan, the traps of people, the traps of society around round about us, right? We can make shipwreck of our faith so easily.   we don't have the strength to withstand. We need God's strength. We need God's spirit. We need God's word. Right? Second Timothy chapter 3 and verse 5. 2 Timothy 3 and verse 5. Statement we referred to last time couple of weeks ago that has such a a wakeup call for us. having a form of godliness but denying its power. Having <b>a lookalike of spirituality, an appearance of Christianity</b>, but <b>denying the power</b> that comes from being born again, filled with the spirit, walking with the Lord. Right? And that's a it's a very sobering   warning. And then verse six, always learning and never able to come to knowledge of the truth. I think that's a wakeup call. We can be ever learning, reading our Bible, doing Bible studies, getting involved with camps or whatever. We can be reading articles, ever learning, but <b>never truly coming to a knowledge of the truth</b>. That personal knowledge to kind of have a distant Christianity, but not that inner person. reality of having tasted and seen that the Lord is good. Right? It's very very close. It's very very personal in chapter 3 and verse 8, he speaks about Janice and Jambre who resisted Moses. So do these also resist the truth. Men of corrupt minds disapproved concerning the faith. We don't know anything about Janice and Jambre. We were not given any other scriptural information but just they're mentioned here as being obviously somebody who was were difficult people in the life of Moses in in the Old Testament and particular it says that they resisted the truth you say oh I don't resist the truth I'm Bible believing Christian yeah but what passages of scripture do you resist so easy to do that in a general way say yeah I accept the Bible. I'm saved. I've accepted Jesus. But then we come across passages of scripture and we want to argue against them. We want to explain them away. Right? That's why we need to be workmen who who know how to divide the word of truth. When you look at the scripture, it's an Old Testament and New Testament. Within the Old Testament, there are sections. Okay? There are stages of development within the Old Testament. Not every word, everything that was said is equally applicable to every person. There are things that are spoken to Adam and Eve that were not necessarily spoken directly to Noah and things that were spoke to Noah that were not spoken to to Abraham. And so you could go through the scripture. Yes, there are are passages that are very specific in their context. Right? We need to understand context. We need to understand how to study the Bible and understand the the distinctions between the various stages of Revelation. But we need to be very careful because of the flesh. We cross over that line and if we find something we don't like or that we feel condemns us or or we feel is uncomfortable or inconvenient, then we kick into this, oh well that doesn't apply, right? And we can explain away passage of scripture instead of embracing scripture and saying this is the word of God. If the word of God is confronting me about something in my life, it's not the word of God that I need to explain away. It's my life that needs to change so that I can walk pleasing to the Lord. Let's back up and you say about time, Peter.

Let's go to something more positive and go back to those examples that are given of faithfulness of true believers. Just very quickly, Timothy himself, okay, Paul calls him my beloved son. Right there, second Timothy chapter 1 and verse two, my beloved son. Obviously, a very warm relationship there between Paul and Timothy.   in chapter one he talks about him in verses 13 and 14 holding fast the pattern of sound words which you've heard from me in faith and love which are in Christ Jesus etc. He was entrusted with guarding the gospel right don't let the gospel be watered down don't let the gospel be lost what I have taught you he said that's been entrusted that's a stewardship right and so be very careful that you know the word that you understand the word that you apply the word correctly. Okay, so that's a it's appalling. It's a privilege, but also a challenge. Again, chapter 2, the first three verses, he encourages Timothy. Be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. All right? Be strong in that grace. That grace that you received when you got saved, don't forget that grace. Keep accessing it. Going back, talk to the Lord. Listen to the Lord. Draw from the Lord, right? Let him be your guide and your strength and your wisdom. Go back to that grace because you need grace as much today as the day you were saved. You don't need less grace now. We need as much grace as we ever have. Be strong in that grace. And he says it's in Christ Jesus. That's where you'll find it. Right? That you you be with him. Be in him. Be in in in in fellowship with him all the time. Very interesting. Verse one says Paul says, "I call to remembrance the genuine faith that is in you which dwelt first in your grandmother Lois and your mother Ununice and I'm persuaded is in you also. Wow. So a godly family heritage   the father and the grandfather are not mentioned but the mother and the grandmother are mentioned right many homes like that it's a divided home right and yet those who were true believers were very intentional in terms of passing on their faith and Timothy's life was obviously severely impacted by that. If you want to do the research, you can go back and see where else Timothy is mentioned. Lots of places in the New Testament. You'll find him in Acts 17, Acts 18, Acts 19, Acts 20. Again and again, different scenarios there.   you'll find him in Romans 16 and also in 2 Corinthians, in Philippians, in Colossians, in 1 and 2 Thessalonians, in Phileiman, in Hebrews, you'll find Timothy mentioned all all over the place. So, there's a lot of information that's given to us there on on Timothy. I love the fact that he's highly commended by Paul, right? Highly commended by Paul. Let me read this. 1 Corinthians 4 and verse 17. I've sent Timothy to you. Listen to this. He is my beloved and faithful son in the Lord. He will remind you of my ways in Christ. Isn't that lovely? He said, "I love Timothy. He's a faithful son in the Lord." Right? And he said, "When he comes to you, he will remind you of my ways." And I I just I love that picture of the faithfulness and consistency of of Timothy. We read elsewhere in 1 Corinthians 16, Paul says, "Timothy does the work of the Lord." It's a simple statement, right? But imagine that characterizing a person. When you think of So he does the work of the Lord. When I think about that, he does the work of the Lord. So he doesn't love this present world. He does the work of the Lord. That's that's what marks him out in to the Thessalonians. Paul says Timothy is our brother and servant of God, a fellow laborer in the gospel of Christ. Right? So enjoyed fellowship with the other believers, a brother, true brother in the Lord, a servant of God. His life poured out not not for his own sake but surrendered to the Lord and a fellow laborer in the gospel, right? A life that really counted for eternity. And interesting in in 1 Timothy chapter 1 and verse two, right at the beginning of that first letter, he addresses Timothy as a true son or a genuine son in the faith. And of course, as we've seen later on, Paul's going to go and talk about others who were not genuine, right? Who had a form of godliness. but denied the power thereof. There Timothy is a wonderful example. I'd encourage you take take a concordance or look up all the references to Timothy in the New Testament and and use that as a wonderful encouraging example of a faithful   believer. Just want to mention his his grandmother and mother Lois and Ununas. And   again I'm fascinated. He says 2 Timothy 1:5 when I called to remembrance the genuine faith that is in you. The genuine faith that is in you. See how Paul again and again in this epistle, he's contrasting the genuine with the fake, right? Contrasting the faithful with the unfaithful, the negative with with the positive. He said, Timothy, you're the real deal. You're not a pretend Christian. You have genuine faith. And he said, I'm not surprised because that's what I saw in your grandmother and your mother. as well. The power of a godly example, you see, I think is phenomenal. <b>Genuine faith</b>. Two faithful women loved the Lord, lived for the Lord. They didn't just say, "Oh, I have faith." They lived out their faith. They lived out their trust to the Lord in every area, right? They lived out their reliance on God. Wasn't just theory. Wasn't just words. It's very easy to say, "Oh, I know the Lord. Oh, yeah. I'm saved. Yeah. I have faith. Very easy to say those words. But Lois and Ununice and Timothy had genuine faith, active faith, daily faith, practical faith, right? Faith that transformed and changed them. That's the kind of faith that the scripture presents as real faith, right? Because Lois and Ununas were so faithful, they passed on their faith to Timothy. They didn't just try and make Timothy look like a Christian. There's a huge danger I think we fall into with our kids, with our grandkids, with friends. If we can just get them to church, get them to carry a Bible, get them to say the right words and act in a certain way. Oh, good. Now they're Christians. Not necessarily. Right. The goal is not to simply try and get people to look and act or sound like Christians. The goal is that they each come to a person faith in Christ. Doesn't matter who their parents, their grandparents were or whatever. They need to have that personal faith in Christ. And that's what these ladies communicated to Timothy. Yeah, we believe, but you need to believe for yourself. Yes, we're following the Lord, but you need to believe and follow the Lord yourself. I think it's just encouraging the the impact that a godly parent or grandparent can have, right? We can impact our children and our grandchildren. If we are living faithful lives if we have genuine faith, others will see that, right? And the purpose of a witness or a testimony is to make people hungry and thirsty for God. Not to get them to follow us, not for them to say, "Oh, you're a very religious person." But to get them to say, "This God that you you you love and serve and worship, he must be awesome. I want I want to know him too. You obviously just enjoy the fact that you you are saved and you walk with the Lord and it touches every area of your life. I I want that as well. I want to know the Lord. I wonder, you know, if we pray enough and take the the opportunity enough to be godly Christlike role models. What if we take it seriously enough? Sometimes I think We we we we do we just think, okay, give the kids a track. Make sure they have a Bible and some Bible coloring pages or whatever. Take them to Sunday school and and the Sunday school to send them to youth group and camp. They they'll fix them. No, it's not how it works. Our kids and grandkids need to see us being the genuine article. That as as we've spoken to so many young people over the years, that is the number one reason that people give grew up in a Christian home but turned away from the Lord. My parents were fake. They were hypocrites. They were when they were at church was something completely different from when they were at home. That's devastating. It's devastating. Right. Let's pray and and and and trust that you know we individually might truly know the Lord, walk with the Lord, have genuine faith and trust in the Lord. Let me mention Another one, chapter 1, 2 Timothy chapter 1 and verse 16. Very quickly um interesting name oneshorus. I've heard it pronounced as oneus and onesiferus and all kinds of pronunciations. I don't know what the correct one is. I say oneshaporus. You can say it whichever way you want to.   but this man says he often refreshed me and was not ashamed. of my chains. And he searched diligently for Paul in Rome until he found him. He's mentioned in Ephesus chapter 1 as well as   as being a godly man. And in fact there in Eph in um I think it's Ephesians 4:19. I didn't write down the reference.   the household of anesorus is mentioned. Um which indicated again that he seems to have had a godly heritage there.   he refreshed Paul all not ashamed of of his chains. Titicus is mentioned also um mentioned here in in second Timothy in in chapter 4 and verse 12 um mentioned in Titus as well. He's mentioned in Acts and Ephesians and Colossians number of times Titicus is mentioned as one who was a trusted co-orker, a beloved brother, a fellow minister, a fellow servant in in the Lord. a faithful minister of of the Lord. He's mentioned again and again in terms of being faithful, faithful, positive example, positive role model, somebody who had genuine faith. Luke is mentioned here in in second Timothy 4 and 11. And it's an interesting reference. He says, "Only Luke is with me. All the others have moved on. Some have turned away. Some Paul had had sent on to work with with in other situations. He says, "Only Luke is with me." Imagine he's in prison. He's going through a hard time coming very near the end of his life. And there's only Luke had stuck it out with Paul. And of course, Luke is the writer of the of the Gospel of Luke. He's the writer of the book of Acts as well.   he would have have learned and heard many things from Paul firsthand in terms of making his own record in in the scripture. But he was steadfast with Paul. He wasn't a fair weather friend. He was putting himself in danger. by associating with Paul, visiting Paul, right? Paul was in prison because of his faith. And so when Luke is visiting him and with him, he's also putting himself as a potential target. He was an affair with a friend. And you know, we need to stand with other believers, don't we? And when as tough things get tough and even when when a believer is going through a very difficult time, we need to stand with each other and and and we need to be there for each other. If we're not there for each other, who will be? The world's not going to stand with us as believers. More and more the world will reject us. We need each other. We need to pray for each other. We need to love each other. We need to care for each other. Right? And we need to physically be with each other. We need to come to fellowship with. We need each other. I need you. You need me. We need each other as part of the body of Christ. Right? We need to stand together. And if somebody is going through a difficult time or they go down, don't abandon them, but stick with them. Might become messy, but stick with them, right? Only Luke is with me. Also in chapter 4, John Mark is mentioned. He says, "Get Mark and bring him with you for he is useful to me for ministry." This is the same John Mark that we read about in Acts chapter 13 who had gone with Paul and Barnabas and who quit. Things got tough and he quit and and he left him and Paul was very angry with him. And so later on In Acts 15, Barnabas wants to take John Mark now and bring him back on board and disciple him. Paul says, "No ways. No, if you if you bring him on board, I'm out of here." And so Paul and Barnabas actually split up ways. It's a very, very sad account. And Paul goes off one way and Barnabas and Mark go off another way. He's like, "Wow, how sad." But interesting how even Paul himself, the apostle, had to learn and and to apply grace in this situation because Barnabas, whose name means son of encouragement, obviously had worked with John Mark and taken him from somebody who quit under pressure to being a faithful, reliable, profitable servant of the Lord. Isn't that lovely? That's great, right? And again, sometimes, you know, you and I can fail each other. And when we do fail each other, don't just write the person off. Pray for them, work with them, reach out to them. And if you will be a person of encouragement to somebody else who's struggling, you might well be the catalyst that the Lord will use to build up to edify them to once again become a useful   Christian, a useful servant of God. Priscilla and Aquilla are mentioned here as well   in in this in this book and they were an amazing couple really.   they we read about them in Acts 18 first of all. Um and we read about them in different places in in the New Testament. And what was interesting was at one point they took aside Apollos.   he he was a Jew born in Alexander, an eloquent man, mighty in the scriptures. He came to Ephesus and he was teaching there. And Priscilla and Aquilla, this husband and wife, heard him. They said, "Yeah, he's got a real gift from the Lord. He's got a certain amount of knowledge of the scripture, but some things are kind of odd." So, it seems like they invited him over for a meal and they set him straight. And it says they showed him, they taught him the word of God more adequately or or more correctly and he had the humility to learn from them and as he learned he became more useful and so they mentioned here in acts in first 2 Timothy 4 and verse 19 as co-workers Prrisca and Aquill or Priscilla and Aquilla Paul sends greetings to him in Romans 16 and again in 1 Corinthians chapter 16 there are a couple of other mentions Titus and Cresens are mentioned of course just in passing um but these are the main ones that are are mentioned here. So this contrast what are we left with as we leave today positive and negative which are we going to be are we going to be a negative example unfaithfulness form of godliness theory words but just an empty shell or we're going to be the real deal genuine faith true following the Lord personal relationship with the Lord faithful to him, faithful to the body of Christ, faithful to one another. Right? So quite a contrast between these two groups. And we got to watch ourselves and our teaching. We don't want to be spreading spiritual cancer like some of these people were. We don't want to be confusing people. We don't want to be, you know, vain babblings. We want to we don't want to get distracted on the minutia. We want to major on the majors. Make sure we correctly represent the word of God. Correctly represent the Lord. Jesus Christ. But again, not just theoretically, in a very practical way by living transformed daily lives strong in the grace that is in our Lord Jesus Christ. So let's pray. Heavenly Father, we thank you again for an opportunity to open your word to study together. And we thank you for leaving us examples, bad examples that we need to avoid, that we can learn from. And not that we judge them, but Lord, your word puts them in a certain light. And so as we read about them and read what they were and what they said and what they did and and we learn some things about the way we ought not to be. We thank you for those positive examples that you give of of men and women who are so faithful who loved you and who served you or committed to you   who followed you. Father, we want to be like them. We want our lives to be   increasing in terms of growing in grace and the knowledge of the Lord Jesus. We want to be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. We want to follow hard after to we want to be passionate about things of eternity, the things that are of spiritual value and not just chase down things that that are momentary. We don't want to be like Deeus who loved this present world or we rather want to be like like Timothy. We want to be like Titicus. We want to be like Lois and and Ununas and these other positive examples that the legacy we leave would be a legacy of truth, of holiness, of godliness, of Christlikkeness, and that our lives would touch others, that others would truly be be affected with the gospel, with the truth, be affected with the grace of God. So, Father, we pray for strength and help and wisdom. We pray that even these things that we've discussed today stay in our minds and not just evaporate, but they would stay there and that we would think on these things and that by your spirit, you would take them and apply them deeper and deeper into our lives. So, Father, thank you again just for this time. Thank you for this local body of Christ. Christ and we thank you for every blessing that we enjoy from your hand in Jesus name. Amen. Amen.