---
weight: 01
title: Christianity I - Abraham's Faith
authors: null
categories: null
tags: null
series: null
description: 
draft: false
date: "2026-07-04"
lastmod: "2026-07-04"
toc: true
---

<!--more-->

# Christianity is not a religion

<ol>
<li>&nbsp;God is far away.
</li>

<li>&nbsp;Human beings come to pray to the God only when needed.
</li>

<li>&nbsp;
</li>

<li>&nbsp;
</li>
</ol>
  

# The Time Abram lived in Ur

## The society
1) Geography / Agriculture: Mesopotamia encompasses the land between the Euphrates and Tigris rivers. Its environment was low annual precipitation, increased temperatures, and limited water availability.  The geography of southern Mesopotamia is such that agriculture is possible only with irrigation and with good drainage.  With irrigation, the food supply in Mesopotamia was comparable to that of the Canadian prairies.

2) Law: Babylon was known as "the lawmaker" and created the Code of Hammurabi, which is one of the earliest sets of laws found and one of the best preserved examples of this type of document from ancient Mesopotamia.  Babylon became one of the main cities in Mesopotamia. 


3) Religion: Ur was a major center for Mesopotamian polytheism. Its patron deity was the moon god, Nanna (Sin). However, the region also heavily worshipped Inanna (later known as Ishtar), the Sumerian goddess of love, sex, beauty, and warfare. [<a href = "https://www.facebook.com/groups/1424720167832570/posts/3236301296674439/" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">facebook</a>]  
2) 

## The socio-economic status

The Bible does not specifically state how Abram made a living while he lived in Ur. However, based on the biblical descriptions of his wealth, Jewish tradition, and the historical context of ancient Ur, we have a good picture of his socio-economic status.

1. He was part of a wealthy, semi-nomadic pastoral family  
The book of Genesis indicates that when Abram left Ur (and later Haran), he left with immense wealth. Genesis 12:5 says he took "all the possessions they had accumulated and the people they had acquired". Later in Genesis 13:2, it notes he was "very rich in livestock, in silver, and in gold." This indicates that Abram's primary livelihood was essentially as a wealthy herdsman or livestock owner. In the ancient Near East, a family of this status would manage massive herds of sheep, goats, and cattle, employing many servants to tend them.

Nimrod, king of Babylon, appointed Abrahm's father Terah, Chief General of his armed forces, making Terah the highest official in the land, beloved and respected by all.

2. Trade and Commerce
Ur of the Chaldeans was a highly advanced, prosperous Sumerian city located on the Euphrates River (in modern-day southern Iraq). It was a major hub for international trade, commerce, and agriculture. As the head of a wealthy pastoral family, Abram likely engaged in trade, selling livestock, wool, dairy, and meat to the urban center of Ur in exchange for silver, gold, and manufactured goods.

3. Jewish Tradition (Midrash)
While not in the Bible, ancient Jewish rabbinic tradition (the Midrash) claims that Abram's father, Terah, owned a business manufacturing and selling idols, as Ur was a center for polytheistic worship (specifically the moon god, Nanna). According to this tradition, Abram worked in his father's idol shop when he was young, though he famously mocked the customers and eventually smashed the idols.

Ancient Jewish traditions (Midrash) add that Terah was actually an idolatrous priest and a merchant who manufactured and sold idols.  The family would have lived in a society where sexual rites were normalized as part of religion. [<a href = "https://www.chabad.org/library/article_cdo/aid/4529921/jewish/Who-Was-Terah.htm#Terahthe" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">chabad.org | who was Terah?</a>] 

4. Family: wife - Sarah, half-sister, no son

5. Abram left Haran at 75 years old.

In summary, biblically and historically, Abram made his living through large-scale livestock management and trade, acting as the wealthy patriarch of a large, semi-nomadic household on the outskirts of a highly civilized trade city.


<div class = "quote" style="background-color: #0A7E8C; color: white">
Question: Did Terah and Abram know YAHWEH?

Possibly. Here is an evidence

Genesis 31:53 NKJV   
Laban said to Jacob: The God of Abraham, the God of Nahor, and <b>the</b> God ['ĕlôhı̂, H430ym] of their father judge between us.” And Jacob swore by the Fear of his father Isaac.

They worshiped other gods in addition to YAHWEH.


</div>

<br>

<div class = "quote" style="background-color: #0A7E8C; color: white">
<b>Observation</b>: Was Abram good before he was called?

<ol>
<li>&nbsp; Not at all.  He was as sinful as we were.
</li>
<li>&nbsp; Abram did not have any credit
</li>
</ol>

</div>

# Crossed Euphrates River

<ol>
  <li>&nbsp; Two calls, and 15 years of delay at Haran.
  </li>
  
  <li>&nbsp; Abrahm did not know where he was going. [Hebrews 11:8]
<ul>
<mark style="background-color: #F08C60 ; color: black;">It is a good thing to know nothing about the future.  I wonder when Abram looked back the journey he made, he would not start off.  God's word is the lamp to my feet, light to my path [Psalms 119:105]</mark>
</ul>
  </li>
  
  <li>&nbsp;If you were traveling from southern Ur, going up to Haran and then to Canaan would actually require crossing the Euphrates twice.
<ul>
why abram chose Haran to cross euphrates river?
<li>&nbsp;Terah and Abram's family went to Haran not primarily as a strategic choice to "cross the Euphrates" at that specific point.  but because Haran sat at the geographic and commercial crossroads of the entire ancient Near East.  Haran was literally named "crossroads" or "highway".

The direct route from Ur to Canaan would cut straight across the Arabian Desert—but this was "a vast, treacherous desert without any water or resources".
</li>
</ul>  
  </li>

  <li>&nbsp; The meaning of Hebrew - the typology of crossing rivers
  </li>
</ol>


# Abram's Response - faith

## The first altar at Shechem, the terebinth (oak) tree of Moreh

<div class = "quote" style="background-color: #FF6103 ; color: white">
The first time Abram presented submission.
</div>

YAHWEH appeared here.

Use our imagination.    
Prayer: Halleuya! Praise God. God provides this land to us, we shall live here. 

Abram probably stayed there a little while.

<div class = "quote" style="background-color: #0A7E8C; color: white">
Applications: 
<ol>
<li>&nbsp;Do we care about God's plan?
</li>

</ol>
</div>


## The second altar at Bethel
When Abram returned from Egypt to Bethel.

<div class = "quote" style="background-color: #FF6103 ; color: white">
The second time Abram presented submission.
</div>

<br>
Lot chose Zoar.

<div class = "quote" style="background-color: #0A7E8C; color: white">
Application: What does it mean to us?

<ol>
<li> &nbsp; we might be like Lot to choose an easy life.
</li>
<li>&nbsp; We were called for the purpose, not for our ego-interest.
<ul>
The contrast between Mesopotamia vs. Canaan

The climate difference will make Abram's life challenging.

Abraham did not look at the circumstance.
</ul>
</li>

</ol>
</div>


## Abraham's faith: Wait for the city
Hebrews 11:10


<div class = "quote" style="background-color: #0A7E8C; color: white">
<b>Question</b>: Why did God call out Abram?
<ol>
<li>&nbsp;It is about a mission. Personal blessing was never meant to be the endpoint. The final clause in verse 3 is often read as the <i>telos (goal)</i> of everything preceding it. Gen 12:1-3]  
"Now the promises were spoken to Abraham and to his seed. He does not say, 'And to seeds,' as of many, but as of one, 'And to your seed,' who is Christ." [Galatians 3:16]

[<a href = "https://www.workingpreacher.org/commentaries/revised-common-lectionary/second-sunday-in-lent/commentary-on-genesis-121-4a-5" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Working Preacher | Commentary on Genesis 12:1-4a</a>]
</li>

<li>&nbsp;Abram was in the genealogy of Noah (before), Jesus (after).  God had a plan of salvation for human being.
</li>

<li>&nbsp;God brought Abram to Salem where Melchizedek was the king.
</li>

</ol>
</div>

# Conclusion

Isaac's sacrifice was not "the" defining moment.  <mark style="background-color: #A8CD66 ; color: black;">James 2:21-22: James goes even further, saying Abraham's faith was "completed" (or "perfected") by this act: "Was not Abraham our father justified by works when he offered Isaac his son upon the altar? ...faith apart from works is dead"</mark>. This suggests that whatever faith Abraham had in Genesis 15, it reached its fullness only in Genesis 22.

Genesis 15:6 states Abraham "believed the LORD, and he counted it to him as righteousness" — this happens seven chapters before the Isaac test. 

<div class = "quote" style="background-color: #0A7E8C; color: white">
Application: What do we learn from Abraham?
<ol>
<li>&nbsp;He is as normal as we are.
</li>

<li>&nbsp;His intimacy communication with God.
</li>

<li>&nbsp;His faith was not built on blessings, but God.  He cared about what God thought.  He did not complain to God.
</li>

<li>&nbsp; When a believer lacks Abraham-like faith—trusting God's promises enough to obey even when it costs something—the natural result is exactly what you describe: an intensified pull between what the self wants (ego/flesh) and what God wants.  
Galatians 5:17 describes this conflict directly: "For the flesh desires what is contrary to the Spirit, and the Spirit what is contrary to the flesh; for these are opposed to each other, to keep you from doing whatever you want". This is described as a genuine internal battle every believer experiences—not a sign of failed faith, but the normal condition of the Christian life this side of glory.


</li>
</ol>
</div>

<br>

The road less traveled.


<div class = "quote">

</div>

<ol>
<li>&nbsp;
</li>
</ol>


