---
weight: 09
title: Experiencing Creation
authors: null
categories: null
tags: null
series: null
description: 
draft: false
date: "2023-08-27"
lastmod: "2023-08-27"
toc: true
---

<!--more-->

I wish you would agree with me that when we come to the Lord's table and remember Jesus' death, it is a precious moment to understand Jesus' life, Jesus character.  

Jesus' life is not somebody's life, Jesus' life is my life.  Jesus' life is in me.

While I prepared myself for the bread and cup.  I meditate a well-known verse, Galatians 2:20.  Let me read one verse to you.

Galatians 2:20 ESV  
I have been crucified with Christ. It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me. And the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.

This verse tells us a reality, as long as we profess and possess the faith in Jesus, we possess Jesus life.  The fact is Christians live in the culture of self-help and positive attitude and this verse is moved to the blind spot.  As a result, in a christian, ego grows big, Jesus' life shrinks, the congregation falls in trouble.


Do you know the mindeset behind this culture? Evolution. This world believes in human being can be self improved, but God did not see the same way.  Without Jesus, we are like a running chicken without head, we seek solutions, and are frustrated.

I wish you would follow me. If we experience Jesus' life growing in each individual, we will understand the creation in the beginning of the world.

Genesis 2:7 ESV  
then the LORD God formed the man of dust from the ground and <b>breathed into his nostrils the breath of life</b>, and the man became a living creature.  

Evolution / I reserve my opinion on 'transformation'.


John 20:22 ESV  
And when he (Jesus) had said this, he <b>breathed on them</b> and said to them, "Receive the Holy Spirit. ..."


