---
weight: 13
title: Jesus is a worm
authors: null
categories: [Breaking of Bread]
tags: [Crimson worm]
series: null
description: 
draft: false
date: "2023-09-23"
lastmod: "2023-09-23"
toc: true
---

Jesus gave his life.

The life in us.

not an easy ministry.

Don't simulate the life, but let the life grow.
<!--more-->

Jesus became a worm, lower than a man.

The hebrew word for "worm" is used as a man (Job 25:6, Isa 31:14, 66:24), a crimson or scarlet worm. The colors crimson and scarlet are very deep, blackish-red, which is the color of blood.

<b>The lifecycle of crimson worm</b>.

When the female crimson worm is ready to lay her eggs, which happens only once in her life, she climbs up a tree or fence and attaches herself to it. With her body attached to the wooden tree, a hard crimson shell forms. It is a shell so hard and so secured to the wood that it can only be removed by tearing apart the body, which would kill the worm.

The female worm lays her eggs under her body, under the protective shell. When the larvae hatch, they remain under the mother’s protective shell so the baby worms can feed on the living body of the mother worm for three days. After three days, the mother worm dies, and her body excretes a crimson or scarlet dye that stains the wood to which she is attached and her baby worms. The baby worms remain crimson-colored for their entire lives. Thereby, they are identified as crimson worms.

On day four, the tail of the mother worm pulls up into her head, forming a heart-shaped body that is no longer crimson but has turned into a snow-white wax that looks like a patch of wool on the tree or fence. It then begins to flake off and drop to the ground looking like snow.

<b>The lifecycle of crimson worm pointed to the work of Jesus on the cross</b>.

Just as the mother worm attaches herself to the wood of a tree or fence, Jesus put himself on a wooden cross, a type of “tree.” And Jesus willingly allowed the nails to be driven into His hands (1 John 3:16). However, it wasn’t the nails that held Him on the cross. It was His desire to fulfill the purpose and plan of God the Father to redeem man from sin 

Just as the mother worm, when crushed, excretes a crimson, scarlet dye that both covers the baby worms and stains, or marks, them, Jesus was also bruised, or crushed, for our iniquities (Isa 53:5). 

Just as the baby worm is dependent on the mother worm for the crimson dye to give it life and to mark it, a repentant sinner must depend on the blood of Jesus for the forgiveness of sins, to receive new life, and to be marked as His own.

Reference: <a href = "https://reasonsforhopejesus.com/psalm-22-crimson-scarlet-worm/" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Reasons for Hope Jesus | How was Jesus Like a Worm? What’s the Crimson (or Scarlet) Worm? A Remez In Psalm 22?</a>