---
weight: 40 
title: Hosea 11
authors: null
categories: null
tags: null
series: null
description: 
draft: false
date: "2024-04-21"
lastmod: "2024-04-21"
toc: true
---

<!--more-->

We touched upon the long-suffering love a couple of weeks ago on Sunday.  We are His workmanship, he begun his work in us, and will complete it until the day of Jesus Christ.  Today I want to keep describing the long-suffering love using different verses.

The love story happened in around 750 BC. God commended Hosea to marry a prostitute. It was an arranged marriage, not love marriage.  They had happy time in the first couple of years, but ended with Gomer's leaving, because she was not satisfied with Hosea's love, maybe she looked after freedom.  And yet, God commended Hosea to buy back her.  The story is simple and yet there is profound application.

Not only Gomer is the representative of Israel, but also people all behave like Gomer at some point and at different level. Let us turn to Hosea 11.



verse 3 and 4. 

[3] "I taught Ephraim to walk, Taking them by their arms; But they did not know that I healed them. 
[4] I drew them with gentle cords, With bands of love, And I was to them as those who take the yoke from their neck. I stooped and fed them.

People believe in the delusion that we achieved goals and success with our strength, talent, and network.  They turned their face from God, <u>ignoring there is the God</u>.

verse 2

[2] As they called them, So they went from them; They sacrificed to the Baals, And burned incense to carved images.

verse 8

[8] "How can I give you up, Ephraim? How can I hand you over, Israel? How can I make you like Admah? How can I set you like Zeboiim? My heart churns within Me; My sympathy is stirred.

Let us put our names there, and go like this:

How can I give you up, Lenny?  How can I hand you over, Lenny?

Do we feel God's Lament? 

Let us examine ourselves. When we sinned against God, we did not get consequence.  We grieve God.











Brother Bob mentioned that a brother preached a message based on one word in John 3:16, SO.  Just one word.  Brother Roy used TLDR to summarize the meaning of John 3:16.  



The most famous verses are 1 Corinthians 13:4-8 beginning with Love suffers long.  They are quoted in many wedding ceremonies.


Love is the greatest theme that human beings never feel obsessed with various forms: novels, movies, songs, paintings, and so on. On the contrary, few can be found associated with God's love in the secular world.  In fact, some Christians do not understand God's love.  They are quite content to the warm feelings, parental love, grandparents' love, gift, Santa Clause.

Today, I want to tell you a different story about Gods' love. It happened in around 750 BC. Hosea obeyed God's command, and went to marry a wife of harlotry, Gomer.  The book of Hosea began with such command.  Hosea was not out of mind.  His marriage was not driven by hormones.  There was no romantic love.

Gomer was not satisfied with one man and left him, 

God's love ink with ocean
Hosea 11

God's love leads us to the Cross, and repent.

God's love responsibility, long-suffering, 

our situation: not limit to sexual immorality, 

human nature. if we don't keep ourselves being separate from the world, our conscience/ holiness will be decayed



The greatest love story doesn't always produce dopamine, but always bring people to the cross and repent.

We don't need to look around for the greatest love story. Bible is the greatest love story.  