---
weight: 45
title: "2024-07-13 Jesus' Joy"
authors: null
categories: null
tags: null
series: null
description: 
draft: false
date: "2024-07-13"
lastmod: "2024-07-13"
toc: true
---

<!--more-->


Hebrews 12:2 NKJV
looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before Him endured the cross, despising the shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.


When we survey the cross, it is the sign of shame, death, cost, darkness, wrath of God, the cruelty of humanity.  Jesus experienced physical sufferings and spiritual sufferings. I wonder if you ask yourselves one question: Did Jesus see his sufferings and the cross differently?  The author said this in the book of Hebrews 12:2: Jesus endured the cross for the joy that was set before Him.  The Amplified translation interpreted the joy as the joy of accomplishing the prize.  Others may consider the moment when Jesus sat down at the right hand of the throne of God was joyful.  I want to take you to the book of Philippians, and let apostle Paul explained what is joy from his perspective.

The words "rejoice, rejoice, rejoicing" stood out to me after I listen this book multiple times. They appear twelve times in four chapters.  There were three reasons that made Paul rejoiced.

The first reason is that Christ was preached no matter what intentions were (from 1:12 to 1:18).  He was called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ for preaching the gospel (Rom 1:1).  Likewise, Jesus Christ

The second reason is that the christian life grew, and became lights in the world (from 2:14 to 2:18).  Likewise, Jesus Christ.

The third reason is 1 Thessalonians 2:19-20 (Philippians 4:1) For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Is it not even you in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at His coming? For you are our glory and joy.

[The point] Jesus Christ did not rejoice for his own prize, but his life can indwell in believers, and they preached His name and gospel in the communities.

Paul spoke up Jesus's mind. Jesus Christ was called for this very reason.  Only love us, can He find joy 

why did He rejoice even when he knew the Cross was His destination?  Paul asked to inmitate Jesus in His death.

Paul encouraged all believers to press toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God in Christ Jesus.


