---
weight: 61
title: Inheritance
authors: null
categories: null
tags: null
series: null
description: 
draft: false
date: "2025-08-16"
lastmod: "2025-08-16"
toc: true
---

<!--more-->

[point #1: We are God's inheritance. The inheritance reflects God's selection, love, and sovereignty.]

God made a promise that the land of Canaan will be the inheritance of the descendants of Abraham [Genesis 12:5,7].    

Little did we know that the chosen people are God's inheritance. God is the creator of everything, the universe, everything on the earth; and yet he chose Israel. Israel was the chosen people[Deuteronomy 4:20 ESV But the Lord has taken you and brought you out of the iron furnace, out of Egypt, to be a people of his own inheritance, as you are this day.]  The chosen gentile became the inheritance when the gospel was spread. 

Deuteronomy 32:8-10 ESV  
8 When the Most High gave to the nations their inheritance, when he divided mankind, he fixed the borders of the peoples according to the number of the sons of God.  
9 But the Lord’s portion is his people, Jacob his allotted heritage.  
10 “He found him in a desert land, and in the howling waste of the wilderness; he encircled him, he cared for him, he kept him as <b>the apple of his eye</b>.  

How precious are God's people to God.  Not only God sent his begotten son, but also because we are his workmanship [Ephesians 1:10], he continues work in us and will complete his work in us until the day of Jesus Christ [Philippians 1:6].


connection point: Yahweh is my [  ], shepherd, savior, rock, shelter, refuge, stronghold, and so on.  Yahweh is my <b>inheritance</b>.

[point #2: God is our inheritance]
Deuteronomy 18:1-2 ESV  
1 “The Levitical priests, all the tribe of Levi, shall have no portion or inheritance with Israel. They shall eat the Lord’s food offerings as their inheritance.  
2 They shall have no inheritance among their brothers; the Lord is their inheritance, as he promised them.

Psalm 16:5.

1.1) The LORD is my shepherd, I shall not want [Psalms 23:1].  You are my LORD, I have nothing good besides you [Psalms 16:2].  The LORD is my chosen portion and my cup; you hold my lot [Psalms 16:5].  He set King David secure on the heights, he made his feet like the feet of a deer, he trained him for war, so that his arms can bend a bow of bronze [Psalms 18:33-34].  

The entire fullness of God's nature dwells bodily in Christ [Colossians 2:9].  

1.2) the meaning of "the Lord is my inheritance". Forever, I won't lose it when I died.


Paul considered everything to be nothing compared to knowing Jesus Christ. 

The Bible is the love story, that started at the beginning of the world, that continues now, and that will take forever.

Song of songs 2:16