---
weight: 76
title: We don't know Submission Unless
authors: null
categories: null
tags: null
series: null
description: 
draft: false
date: "2026-04-26"
lastmod: "2026-04-26"
toc: true
---

<!--more-->

We don't know submission unless we know that we used to live in a sinful life.  God is light, and His light reveals our sin so that we may repent and be cleansed.

Genesis 2:18 NET  
18 The Lord God said, “It is not good for the man to be alone. I will make <b>a companion</b> for him who corresponds to him.”


The English word “helper,” because it can connote so many different ideas, does not accurately convey the connotation of the Hebrew word עֵזֶר (ʿezer). Usage of the Hebrew term does not suggest <b>a subordinate role</b>, a connotation which English “helper” can have. In the Bible God is frequently described as the “helper,” the one who does for us what we cannot do for ourselves, the one who meets our needs. In this context the word seems to express the idea of an “indispensable companion.” The woman would supply what the man was lacking in the design of creation and logically it would follow that the man would supply what she was lacking, although that is not stated here. - NET Bible

Philippians 2:5, 7-8 NKJV  
5 Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus,......  
7 but made Himself of no reputation, taking the form of a bondservant, and coming in the likeness of men.  
8 And being found in appearance as a man, He humbled Himself and became obedient to the point of death, even the death of the cross.
