---
weight: 75
title: Visit H6485
authors: null
categories: null
tags: null
series: null
description: 
draft: false
date: "2026-05-03"
lastmod: "2026-05-03"
toc: true
---

<!--more-->

# Where is God?

I have wondered if God listened my prayers. Maybe some of you questioned does God care about me?

Let us take a look at Exodus 3:16-17 and see if these two verses could provide some insight.

Exodus 3:16-17 NKJV
16 Go and gather the elders of Israel together, and say to them, ‘The Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, appeared to me, saying, “I have surely <b>visited</b> you and seen what is done to you in Egypt;  
17 and I have said I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt to the land of the Canaanites and the Hittites and the Amorites and the Perizzites and the Hivites and the Jebusites, to a land flowing with milk and honey.” ’

I want to get your attention on visit first of all.  Visiting means way more than we usually think. Locally, it’s all about scheduling a time and deciding how long to stay, but it’s not like that in every culture. My elderly neighbor in Manitoba, who grew up in a Mennonite family, actually loves it when people just drop by. She'll stop whatever she's doing to make some tea or coffee and just hang out.  It says that we have close relationship.

The hebrew word, translated to different words.  often translated as visit in the first five books in the OT, convey the meaning that God, plan, make promise, initiation.

King David exclaims in Psalm 8:4, “What is man that you are mindful of him and the son of man that you care for him?” A more literal translation here would be, “What is the  son of man that you would visit him?”.

Genesis 50:24 NKJV
24 And Joseph said to his brethren, “I am dying; but God will surely visit you, and bring you out of this land to the land of which He swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.”

Acts 7:23 NKJV  
23 “Now when he was forty years old, it came into his heart to visit his brethren, the children of Israel.

Exodus 3:16 NKJV
16 Go and gather the elders of Israel together, and say to them, ‘The Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, appeared to me, saying, “I have surely <b>visited</b> you and seen what is done to you in Egypt;  

God is not only the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jocab, he is the God of Israelites.  Fast forward, He is our God.  He cares us, so he sent Jesus to visit us.  While he visited the earth, he made it a habit to visit with people: In the story of Zaccheus, we see God’s desire to visit his people showcased in all of its stunning and shocking beauty.   Zaccheus was a Jew who worked on the inside with the Roman powers who were occupying Israel. He lined his pockets while his own people starved. As such, he was not often welcomed or celebrated. His wealth did not change his diminutive physical stature, so he climbed a tree to see what was going on with this Jesus fella. You likely know the story (Luke 19:1-9).  Jesus sees him, names him, and invites himself over to his house in a gesture that would have shocked both Jew and Roman alike. 

The second point I want to get your attention to is: the expression of the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jocab.  

In conclusion, yes, He cares about each and every one of us to the point that he died for our sake. He caught all our prayers, though the way he answers might not be what you'd think.




[in the end] I  have the answer.