---
weight: 76
title: Jesus is the Kinsman-redeemer
authors: null
categories: null
tags: null
series: null
description: 
draft: false
date: "2026-05-31"
lastmod: "2026-05-31"
toc: true
---

<!--more-->

# The status
利未记 25:23-25 和合本  
23 “地不可永卖，因为地是我的；你们在我面前是客旅，是寄居的。  
24 在你们所得为业的全地，也要准人将地赎回。  
25 你的弟兄（“弟兄”是指本国人说。下同）若渐渐穷乏，卖了几分地业，他<b>至近的亲属</b>就要来把弟兄所卖的赎回。

Leviticus 25:25 KJV  
25 If thy brother be waxen poor, and hath sold away some of his possession, and if any of his <b>kin</b> come to redeem it, then shall he redeem that which his brother sold.


# The context of the book of Ruth
The Book of Ruth narrates property redemption.  Boaz was the kinsman-redeemer to Naomi.  He was one of two close relatives, rich and willing to marry Ruth and redeem a piece land of Elimelech so that he can perpetuate the name of the dead through his inheritance, and the name of dead may not be cut off from among his brethren and from his position at the gate. [Boaz spoke with ten elders of the city, Ruth 4:10]



Ruth, a Gentile, enters the lineage of Christ as Boaz's wife.  It pictures God's grace, since she would have been excluded from the commonwealth of Israel because of their ethnic origin.   

The key word of the book is redeem. Another key word is kinsman (KJV) or relative (NKJV), occurring twelve times. Boaz is a redeeming relative who buys back the land which belonged to Elimelech and raises up posterity to continue the family name. <b>He is a type of Christ</b>, the true Redeeming Relative.   

一个婴儿将在伯利恒出生! 为要救赎祂的亲人

# The meaning of the hebrew term <i>go el</i>

The English translation is kinsman-redeemer.  
1) it designates one who delivers or rescues someone who was in trouble, danger, or need (Genesis 48:16; Exodus 6:6)    
2) it designates a male relatives who redeems property or person (Leviticus 27:9–25, 25:47–55)  

The book of Ruth described Boaz as the kinsman-redeemer.  

Jesus Christ is the NT fulfillment of the OT shadow of the Kinsman Redeemer as portrayed by Boaz in the book of Ruth.




