---
weight: 
title: 2024-01-09 Tuesday Meeting
authors:
categories: null
tags:
description: 
draft: false
date: "2024-01-09"
lastmod: "2024-01-09"
series: null
toc: true
---

<!--more-->
---

# What is faith

Hebrews 11:1 NKJV  
Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.




Faith could be translated into 信任。 

Examples: We have faith in Traditional Chinese Medicine.  Kevin does not have faith in Traditional Chinese Medicine.  Traditional Chinese Medicine is not science, but experience.  Likewise, Belief in Christ is not science.



# Abraham's Faith

Abram's faith vs. Peter's faith  

Hebrews 11:8 NKJV  
By faith Abraham obeyed when he was called to go out to the place which he would receive as an inheritance. And he went out, not knowing where he was going.


Matthew 14:22-33 NKJV
Immediately Jesus made His disciples get into the boat and go before Him to the other side, while He sent the multitudes away. [23] And when He had sent the multitudes away, He went up on the mountain by Himself to pray. Now when evening came, He was alone there. [24] But the boat was now in the middle of the sea, tossed by the waves, for the wind was contrary. [25] Now in the fourth watch of the night Jesus went to them, walking on the sea. [26] And when the disciples saw Him walking on the sea, they were troubled, saying, "It is a ghost!" And they cried out for fear. [27] But immediately Jesus spoke to them, saying, "Be of good cheer! It is I; do not be afraid." [28] And Peter answered Him and said, "Lord, if it is You, command me to come to You on the water." [29] So He said, "Come." And when Peter had come down out of the boat, he walked on the water to go to Jesus. [30] But when he saw that the wind was boisterous, he was afraid; and beginning to sink he cried out, saying, "Lord, save me!" [31] And immediately Jesus stretched out His hand and caught him, and said to him, "O you of little faith, why did you doubt?" [32] And when they got into the boat, the wind ceased. [33] Then those who were in the boat came and worshiped Him, saying, "Truly You are the Son of God."

Both had little faith at the very beginning.

# Abraham's faith and covenant

Abraham was a perfect man, a saint, Hebrew. be separated from the world.

covenant is the by-product.

Proverbs 22:1-2 NKJV
[1] A good name is to be chosen rather than great riches, Loving favor rather than silver and gold. 
[2] The rich and the poor have this in common, The LORD is the maker of them all.

